Content 📖: Quickly test whether ports can be reached on your linux machine. (#43)
cybertec-postgresql/today-i-learned-content: posts/TEMPLATE/index.md

---
date: 2030-12-31 # Auto updates on publish.

> title: Quickly test whether ports can be reached on your linux machine.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
title: Quickly test whether ports can be reached on your linux machine
```

Reviewer: Last remark before approving: Headings shouldn't really be sentences, therefore removing the dot 🙂

Author: ok, fine :)

---
date: 2030-12-31 # Auto updates on publish.
title: Quickly test whether ports can be reached on your linux machine.
author: julian.markwort@cybertec.at
tags: ["firewall", "linux", "netcat", "nc", "ports", "testing", "probe", "listening address"] # max. 10 tags; lowercase; dash-separated
description: "How would you quickly check if a given port is reachable on your system or not, so you can go complain to the network admins? I'll show you my way." # max. 300 chars.
---

> If you've ever tried to launch anything that opens a port on your linux machine and you'd like to know whether you've misconfigured something (e.g. the listen address), or wether you're running into firewall issues, you'll be grateful to find out that there's a very simple way to test for firewall issues.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you've ever tried to launch anything that opens a port on your linux machine and you'd like to know whether you've misconfigured something (e.g. the listen address), or whether you're running into firewall issues, you'll be grateful to find out that there's a simple way to test for firewall issues.
```

Author: Ich weiß, ist schwer zu glauben, aber englische Fragewörter fangen alle mit *wh* an :)
who
which
where
when
whether...

ist auch besser so, sonst würde man es schnell mit weather verwechseln können... Und anscheinend heißt wether sonst "Hammel".

Mit dem very gebe ich dir recht, ich neige schnell dazu, hier und da noch unnötige Betonungen einzubauen...

Author: ach kacke, hab ich mir selbst ins Bein geschossen :D
Ich wusste, dass mir selbst eine Stelle aufgefallen war, an der ichs falsch gemacht habe...
War irgendwie vom diff verwirrt...
Ist schon wieder zu spät ._.

There's a tool called `netcat`; It's part of almost any linux server setup I've worked on and it can be launched by typing `nc` on your command line.

> netcat has two modes:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`netcat` has two modes:
```

> There are two modes to netcat:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
netcat has two modes:
```

- a calling mode
- a listening mode

We can use both of these, on two sides of our server to check if the firewall will let us pass or not.

> (insert thou shall not pass image)

Reviewer 2: Don't forget to insert that image (with git lfs!) :slightly_smiling_face:

Author: @LorenzHenk 
The problem is that I'd like the real image from the films, but we probably shouldn't do that because of copyright reasons...

Reviewer 2: Well, then better leave it out.

> ## Introduction to netcat

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Introduction to `netcat`
```

> On the machine where you'd like to run the server, which will be listen on a given port, say 54321, run this to open a listening netcat:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
On the machine where you'd like to run the server, which will be listen on a given port, say `54321`, run this to open a listening `netcat`:
```

```
nc -vlk 54321
```
I'll break those arguments down for you:

> - v is for verbose: print more details about connections

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `v` is for verbose: print more details about connections
```

> - l is for listening mode

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `l` is for listening mode
```

> - `k` is for keep-open; This means that netcat will accept connections over and over again.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `k` is for keep-open; This means that `netcat` will accept connections over and over again.
```

> - k is for keep-open; This means that netcat will accept connections over and over again.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `k` is for keep-open; This means that netcat will accept connections over and over again.
```

> - 54321 is for the listening port. By default, netcat listens on all IP-addresses it can find, but you can also limit it to a given IP-address, say your primary IP-address, so your service can be reached from your network, but not via localhost, for example.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `54321` is for the listening port. By default, `netcat` listens on all IP-addresses it can find, but you can also limit it to a given IP-address, say your primary IP-address, so your service can be reached from your network, but not via localhost, for example.
```

> - 54321 is for the listening port. by default, netcat listens on all IP-addresses it can find, but you can also limit it to a given IP-address, say your primary IP-address, so your service can be reached from your network, but not via localhost, for example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- 54321 is for the listening port. By default, netcat listens on all IP-addresses it can find, but you can also limit it to a given IP-address, say your primary IP-address, so your service can be reached from your network, but not via localhost, for example.
```

> Vou can stop this netcat by sending the Interrupt Signal, which is usually achieved by pressing `Ctrl` and `c` at the same time in your terminal session.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can stop netcat by sending an interrupt signal, which is usually achieved by pressing <key>Ctrl</key> and <key>C</key> at the same time in your terminal session.
```

Author: Ihh, html...
Aber gut zu wissen, wie sowas geht...

> You can stop netcat by sending an interrupt signal, which is usually achieved by pressing <key>Ctrl</key> and <key>C</key> at the same time in your terminal session.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can stop `netcat` by sending an interrupt signal (<kbd>Ctrl</kbd> + <kbd>c</kbd>).
```

> Now, on the second machine, we'll launch another netcat, this one is set to connect to the first machine, by IP-address (or even hostname) and by port:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, on the second machine, we'll launch another netcat instance, which is set to connect to the first machine, by IP-address (or even hostname) and by port:
```

> Now, on the second machine, we'll launch another netcat instance, which is set to connect to the first machine, by IP-address (or even hostname) and by port:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now, on the second machine, we'll launch another `netcat` instance, which is set to connect to the first machine, by IP-address (or even hostname) and by port:
```

```
nc -vz 192.168.178.24 54321
```
Here, the arguments have the following meaning:

> - v is still for verbose...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `v` is still for verbose
```

> - z is for Zero-I/O mode, meaning that netcat will initiate a connection and report success or failure, but won't transmit any data

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `z` is for Zero-I/O mode, meaning that netcat will initiate a connection and report success or failure, but won't transmit any data
```

> - `z` is for Zero-I/O mode, meaning that netcat will initiate a connection and report success or failure, but won't transmit any data

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `z` is for Zero-I/O mode, meaning that `netcat` will initiate a connection and report success or failure, but won't transmit any data
```

> - 192.168.178.24 is my first machine's local IP-address

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `192.168.178.24` is my first machine's local IP-address
```

> - 54321 is the port that we'd like to connect to.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `54321` is the port that we'd like to connect to.
```

> > Please be aware that it's never possible to bind two applications to the same port. So as long as you have a netcat running that listens on port 54321, trying to launch another application that should listen on 54321 will fail. If in doubt, run `sudo killall nc` to kill all netcats that may still be running in the background (If you launched the netcats detached, by adding a postfix ` &` to your `nc` call).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Please be aware that it's impossible to bind two applications to the same port. So as long as you have a netcat running that listens on port 54321, trying to launch another application that should listen on 54321 will fail. If in doubt, run `sudo killall nc` to kill all netcats that may still be running in the background (If you launched the netcats detached, by adding a postfix ` &` to your `nc` call).
```

Author: wie hier...
https://github.com/cybertec-postgresql/today-i-learned-content/pull/43/files/454ec75a9954afcc1d19e32174d792d67a25c093#r329319511

Reviewer: Edited to only correct "never possible"

> > Please be aware that it's never possible to bind two applications to the same port. So as long as you have a netcat running that listens on port 54321, trying to launch another application that should listen on 54321 will fail. If in doubt, run `sudo killall nc` to kill all netcats that may still be running in the background (If you launched the netcats detached, by adding a postfix ` &` to your `nc` call).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
> Please be aware that it's never possible to bind two applications to the same port. So as long as you have a `netcat` running that listens on port `54321`, trying to launch another application that should listen on `54321` will fail. If in doubt, run `sudo killall nc` to kill all netcats that may still be running in the background (If you launched the netcats detached, by adding a postfix ` &` to your `nc` call).
```

## Do some testing

If you now run these two commands in different terminals, it might look like this:

> 1. open the port

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Open the port
```

```
[julian@linux1 ~]$ nc -vlk 54321
Ncat: Version 7.70 ( https://nmap.org/ncat )
Ncat: Listening on :::54321
Ncat: Listening on 0.0.0.0:54321
```
> Note, that netcat now is listening on all IPv6 addresses (`::` is an IPv6 address wildcard) and all IPv4 addresses (`0.0.0.0` is an IPv4 wildcard) registered on your system.

> 2. try to reach it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Try to reach it
```

```
[julian@linux2 ~]$ nc -vz 192.168.178.24 54321
Ncat: Version 7.70 ( https://nmap.org/ncat )
Ncat: Connected to 192.168.178.24:54321.
Ncat: 0 bytes sent, 0 bytes received in 0.01 seconds.
```

> 3. now, your first terminal will show this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Now, your first terminal will show this:
```

Ncat: Connection from 192.168.178.25:60842.
```

In this scenario, we succeeded with our testing. The port is open and if I now try to make my application available from my own network, I'll only have to troubleshoot the application itself and the configured listening address.

If a firewall was running that prevents my system from accepting connections through the specific port, I'd get something like this, and no new lines from the command on my first system:

```
[julian@linux2 ~]$ nc -vz 192.168.178.24 54321
Ncat: Version 7.70 ( https://nmap.org/ncat )
Ncat: Connection refused.
```

You can also go ahead and experiment with netcat and learn something about how listening addresses work:
run `nc -vlk 127.0.0.1 54321` and `nc -vz 192.168.178.24 54321` or `nc -vlk 192.168.178.24 54321` and `nc -vz 127.0.0.1 54321`. Try what happens if you swap the IP-addresses around (Of course, you need to replace my IP-address with your own.).

Also, try what happens if you use the wrong wildcard: `nc -vlk :: 54321` or `nc -vlk 0.0.0.0 54321`. In the former case, you'll only be able to connect to your machine via IPv6. In the latter case, you can only use IPv4 connections.

> You could then reach it via a hostname and tell the connecting netcat to only use IPv4 or IPv6 connections: `nc -vz6 hostname 54321` and `nc -vz4 hostname 54321`

Reviewer: Fair enough, let's be cute :3
